changes resumability spec to make it compatible with QUIC (#312)
ReactiveSocket/reactivesocket: Protocol.md

The RSocket protocol uses a lower level transport protocol to carry RSocket frames. A transport protocol MUST provide the following:

1. Unicast [Reliable Delivery](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reliability_(computer_networking)).

> 1. Stream-Oriented (similar to [connection-oriented](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Connection-oriented_communication)) preservation of frame ordering for the same stream within a multiplexed connection. Frame A sent before Frame B MUST arrive in source order for the same stream within the same connection. i.e. if Frame A is sent by the same source stream as Frame B, then Frame A will always arrive before Frame B within that stream. No assumptions about ordering across different streams within the same multiplexed connection is assumed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Stream-Oriented (similar to [connection-oriented](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Connection-oriented_communication)) preservation of frame ordering for the same stream within a multiplexed connection. If frame A is sent before frame B, within the same stream, on the same connection, then frame A MUST arrive before frame B. No assumptions are made about ordering across different streams within the same multiplexed connection.
```

The RSocket protocol uses a lower level transport protocol to carry RSocket frames. A transport protocol MUST provide the following:

1. Unicast [Reliable Delivery](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reliability_(computer_networking)).

> 1. [Connection-Oriented](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Connection-oriented_communication) and preservation of frame ordering. Frame A sent before Frame B MUST arrive in source order. i.e. if Frame A is sent by the same source as Frame B, then Frame A will always arrive before Frame B. No assumptions about ordering across sources is assumed.

Reviewer 2: Should this change to stream oriented? We allow reordering of streams, but each stream has the previous guarantees as seen by higher layers?

Author: Yes. That is correct. I tried to look for stream-oriented but there was no such a statement

The RSocket protocol uses a lower level transport protocol to carry RSocket frames. A transport protocol MUST provide the following:

1. Unicast [Reliable Delivery](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reliability_(computer_networking)).

> 1. Stream-Oriented (similar to [connection-oriented](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Connection-oriented_communication)) preservation of frame ordering for the same stream within a multiplexed connection. If frame A is sent before frame B, within the same stream, on the same connection, then frame A MUST arrive before frame B. No assumptions are made about ordering across different streams within the same multiplexed connection.

Reviewer 2: I don't think we should drop connection-oriented completely here. Isn't a TCP socket still an option but with known limitations like head of line blocking.

Author: I guess the point here is to emphasize that we don't need connection-oriented message sending anymore but we rather need stream-oriented. If connection support stream-oriented message sending via connection-oriented message sending - it is fine

Reviewer 2: Maybe worth a clarifying note.  What does this spec mean for something without streams?

Author: yeah. Make sense

    +-------------------------------+---------------+---------------+
    |0|                         Stream ID                           |
    +-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
    |                                                               |
    |                       Implied Position                        |
    |                                                               |
    +-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
    |0|                         Stream ID                           |
    +-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
    |                                                               |
    |                       Implied Position                        |
    |                                                               |
    +-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
    |                              ...                              |
    +-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
                                  Data
```

* __Frame Type__: (6 bits) 0x03
* __Flags__: (10 bits)
     * (__R__)espond with KEEPALIVE or not

> * __Number of Entries__: (24 bits = max value 2^20 = 1,048,576) (optional. Set to all 0s when not supported.)
> * __Stream ID__: (31 bits = max value 2^31-1 = 2,147,483,647) Unsigned 31-bit integer representing the resumable stream Identifier. (present if Number of Entries > 0)

Reviewer 3: Number of entries is described as 24 bits but in reality it is always preceded by 4 `0`s, meaning the max value is `2^20` as correctly stated above. For fields like stream id it will be documented as the number of bits that are significant, in this case 20 (stream id takes 32 bits in the frame but always has a leading `0`, so it says 31 bits in the spec).
```suggestion
* __Number of Entries__: (20 bits = max value 2^20 = 1,048,576) (optional. Set to all 0s when not supported.)
* __Stream ID__: (31 bits = max value 2^31-1 = 2,147,483,647) Unsigned 31-bit integer representing the resumable stream Identifier. (present if Number of Entries > 0)
```

> * __Implied Position__: (64 bits = max value 2^64) Unsigned 64-bit value of the individual Stream Resume Last Received Frame Position from the remote party. Value MUST be > 0. (present if Number of Entries > 0)

Reviewer 2: Do we have any real world use cases and can understand the size of these messages?  Seems like they could be dauntingly large? I'll defer to other directly involved in the discussion, but looks like a huge jump in size and processing complexity here.

Reviewer 2: Throwing a random idea out there, for a connection-oriented stream, should we still support something without per stream accounting?

Author: Indeed. Will clarify that

> * __Implied Position__: (64 bits = max value 2^64) Unsigned 64-bit value of the individual Stream Resume Last Received Frame Position from the remote party. Value MUST be > 0. (present if Number of Entries > 0)

Reviewer 2: Will defer to others, to my mind the limiting to 2^63 makes it way simpler to safely store in a Long.  2^64 is really awkward in Java.

    +-----------+-+-+-+-------------+-------------------------------+
    |Frame Type |0|0|R|    Flags    |
    +-----------+-+-+-+-------------+-------------------------------+
    |0|0|                   Number of Entries                       |
    +-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
    |0|                         Stream ID                           |
    +-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
    |                         Bytes To Skip                         |
    +-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
    |0|                         Stream ID                           |
    +-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
    |                         Bytes To Skip                         |
    +-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
    |                              ...                              |

>     +-------------------------------+-------------------------------+

Reviewer 4: We should also define the meaning of these new fields below.

Author: Absolutely, if this draft sounds like a good start, I will finalize it

* __Frame Type__: (6 bits) 0x08
* __Request N__: (31 bits = max value 2^31-1 = 2,147,483,647) Unsigned 31-bit integer representing the number of items to request. Value MUST be > 0.
* __Flags__: (10 bits)

>     * (__R__)esume: Indicates whether a stream should be resumable. This property takes effect only if the RSocket connection is resumable. This flag should be set only in the REQUEST_CHANNEL scenario by the Responder side. Otherwise, flag can be ignored.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * (__R__)esume: Indicates whether a stream should be resumable. This property is in effect only if the RSocket connection is resumable. This flag should only be set by a responder in a REQUEST_CHANNEL interaction. Otherwise, the flag can be ignored.
```

* __Frame Type__: (6 bits) 0x09
* __Flags__: (10 bits)

>     * (__R__)esume: Indicates whether a stream should be resumable. This property takes effect only if the RSocket connection is resumable. This flag should be set only in the REQUEST_CHANNEL scenario by the Responder side. Otherwise, flag can be ignored.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * (__R__)esume: Indicates whether a stream should be resumable. This property is in effect only if the RSocket connection is resumable. This flag should only be set by a responder in a REQUEST_CHANNEL interaction. Otherwise, the flag can be ignored.
```

       * If set, `onComplete()` or equivalent will be invoked on Subscriber/Observer.
    * (__N__)ext: bit to indicate Next (Payload Data and/or Metadata present).
       * If set, `onNext(Payload)` or equivalent will be invoked on Subscriber/Observer.

>     * (__R__)esume: Indicates whether a stream should be resumable. This property takes effect only if the RSocket connection is resumable. This flag should be set only by the Responder side. Otherwise, flag can be ignored.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * (__R__)esume: Indicates whether a stream should be resumable. This property takes effect only if the RSocket connection is resumable. This flag should only be set by a Responder. Otherwise, the flag can be ignored.
```

The reason this is “implied” is that the position is not included in each frame and is inferred simply by the message being sent/received within the stream in relation to previous frames in this stream.

This position will be used to identify the location for resuming operation to begin.

Frame types outside REQUEST(s), REQUEST_N, CANCEL, ERROR, and PAYLOAD do not have assigned (nor implied) positions.

Note, all the positions are counted in __number of frames__.

> When a Сlient sends a RESUME frame, it has to include a set of __implied positions__ for active resumable streams.  By the reception of the RESUME frame, the server can make a determination on whether resumption is possible: has the client retained all frames past the server's last-retained position.  If resumption is allowed to continue, the server sends a RESUME_OK frame, indicating its set of last-received position for active streams Note, the resumption may be **partially** accepted by the Server meaning that if it is impossible to resume some streams, the Server may not include them in the RESUME_OK frame. By the reception of the RESUME_OK frame, the Client MUST resume only specified streams and the other MUST be terminated immediately with the __REJECTED__ error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a Сlient sends a RESUME frame, it has to include a set of __implied positions__ for active resumable streams.  Upon receiving a RESUME frame, the server can make a determination on whether resumption is possible depending on whether the client retained all frames past the server's last-retained position.  If resumption is allowed to continue, the server sends a RESUME_OK frame back, listing its set of last-received position for active streams. Note that resumption may be **partially** accepted by the Server which means that if it is impossible to resume some streams, the Server may omit them from the RESUME_OK frame. Upon receiving the RESUME_OK frame, the Client MUST resume only the specified streams and while the rest MUST be terminated immediately with the __REJECTED__ error.
```

1. Resumption is optional behavior for implementations. But highly suggested. Clients and Servers should assume NO resumption capability by default.
1. Resumption is an optimistic operation. It may not always succeed.
1. Resumption is desired to be fast and requires a minimum of state to be exchanged.
1. Resumption is designed for loss of connectivity and assumes client and server state is maintained across connectivity loss. I.e. there is no assumption of loss of state by either end. This is very important as without it, all the requirements of "guaranteed messaging" come into play.
1. Resumption assumes no changes to Lease, Data format (encoding), etc. for resuming operation. i.e. A client is not allowed to change the metadata MIME type or the data MIME type or version, etc. when resuming operation.
1. Resumption is always initiated by the client and either allowed or denied by the server.
1. Resumption makes no assumptions of application state for delivered frames with respect to atomicity, transactionality, etc. See above.

### Resume Agreement

> If communication with resumption support has been successfully initiated, the decision on whether a particular REQUEST should be resumed is made separately. For that purpose, a Requester set the (R)esume flag in the REQUEST(s) frame, and if the Responder responds in the first FRAME with the (R)esume flag set, then this stream is assumed to be resumable. Otherwise, if any of the sides did not set the (R)esume flag, the stream assumed to not be resumable. If a Requester has sent a REQUEST frame with the (R)esume flag set, but the connection is lost before the agreement has been made (e.g., any frames were received), such a REQUEST frame has to be redelivered unless the RESUME or RESUME_OK frame received after reconnection includes.

Reviewer 5: seems to be missing the end of the sentence: "includes` the (R)esume flag`." I assume

1. Resumption is always initiated by the client and either allowed or denied by the server.
1. Resumption makes no assumptions of application state for delivered frames with respect to atomicity, transactionality, etc. See above.

### Resume Agreement

> If communication with ressumption support has been successfully initiated, the decision on whether a particular REQUEST should be resumed is done separatelly. For that purpose a Requester set (R)esume flag in the REQUEST(s) frame and if the Responder respond in the first FRAME with the (R)esume flag set, then this stream is assumed to be resumable. Otherwise, if any of the sides did not set flag (R)esume, the stream assumed to not be resumable. If a Requester has sent a REQUEST frame with the (R)esume flag set, but the connection is lost before the aggreement has made (first PAYLOAD received), such REQUEST frame has to be redelivered.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If communication with resumption support has been successfully initiated, the decision on whether a particular REQUEST should be resumed is done separatelly. For that purpose a Requester set (R)esume flag in the REQUEST(s) frame and if the Responder respond in the first FRAME with the (R)esume flag set, then this stream is assumed to be resumable. Otherwise, if any of the sides did not set flag (R)esume, the stream assumed to not be resumable. If a Requester has sent a REQUEST frame with the (R)esume flag set, but the connection is lost before the agreement has made (first PAYLOAD received), such REQUEST frame has to be redelivered.
```

> If communication with ressumption support has been successfully initiated, the decision on whether a particular REQUEST should be resumed is done separatelly. For that purpose a Requester set (R)esume flag in the REQUEST(s) frame and if the Responder respond in the first FRAME with the (R)esume flag set, then this stream is assumed to be resumable. Otherwise, if any of the sides did not set flag (R)esume, the stream assumed to not be resumable. If a Requester has sent a REQUEST frame with the (R)esume flag set, but the connection is lost before the aggreement has made (first PAYLOAD received), such REQUEST frame has to be redelivered.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If communication with ressumption support has been successfully initiated, the decision on whether a particular REQUEST should be resumed is done separately. For that purpose a Requester set (R)esume flag in the REQUEST(s) frame and if the Responder respond in the first FRAME with the (R)esume flag set, then this stream is assumed to be resumable. Otherwise, if any of the sides did not set flag (R)esume, the stream assumed to not be resumable. If a Requester has sent a REQUEST frame with the (R)esume flag set, but the connection is lost before the aggreement has made (first PAYLOAD received), such REQUEST frame has to be redelivered.
```

### Implied Position

Resuming operation requires knowing the position of data reception of the previous connection. For this to be simplified, the underlying transport is assumed to support contiguous delivery of data on a per frame basis. In other words, partial frames are not delivered for processing nor are gaps allowed in the stream of frames sent by either the client or server. The current list of supported transports (TCP, WebSocket, and Aeron) all satisfy this requirement or can be made to do so in the case of TCP.

#### For Stream 

> As a Requester or Responder __sends__ REQUEST_RESPONSE, REQUEST_FNF, REQUEST_STREAM, REQUEST_CHANNEL, REQUEST_N, CANCEL, ERROR, or PAYLOAD frames, it maintains a __position__ of that frame within an individual stream in that direction if the stream is resumable. In other words __position__ is the number of frames a Requester or Responder has sent withing a single logical stream. The __postion__ value is a 32-bit integer that starts at 0. As a Requester or Responder __receives__ those tracked frames, it maintains an __implied position__ of that frame within the stream in that direction. In other words, __implied position__ is the number of frames received by a Requester or Responder within a single logical stream. The __implied position__ is also a 32-bit value that starts at 0.  

Reviewer 2: Thanks for clarifying this.

The reason this is “implied” is that the position is not included in each frame and is inferred simply by the message being sent/received within the stream in relation to previous frames in this stream.

This position will be used to identify the location for resuming operation to begin.

Frame types outside REQUEST(s), REQUEST_N, CANCEL, ERROR, and PAYLOAD do not have assigned (nor implied) positions.

#### For Connection

> As a Server __notifies__ about successfull reception of frames for resumable streams (in the way of sending __implied positions__ for every active resumable stream), the Client MUST maintan a total number of received frames by server based on the provided information. This field is so called __Last Client Available Global Position__. This value is 64-bits long calculated as a sum of all __implied positions__ received from the Server during the whole Client Lifetime.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As a Server __notifies__ about successful reception of frames for resumable streams (in the way of sending __implied positions__ for every active resumable stream), the Client MUST maintan a total number of received frames by server based on the provided information. This field is so called __Last Client Available Global Position__. This value is 64-bits long calculated as a sum of all __implied positions__ received from the Server during the whole Client Lifetime.
```

> This position will be used upon receiving a RESUME frame from the Client and aimed to perform a sanity check and identify any possible gups between Client and Server states.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This position will be used upon receiving a RESUME frame from the Client and aimed to perform a sanity check and identify any possible gaps between Client and Server states.
```

Note, all the positions are counted in __number of frames__.

> When a client sends a RESUME frame, it sends __Last Client Available Global Position__ and a set of __implied positions__ for active resumable streams.  The server can make a determination on whether resumption is possible: have all frames past the client's last-received position been retained? and has the client retained all frames past the server's last-retained position.  If resumption is allowed to continue, the server sends a RESUME_OK frame, indicating its set of last-received position for active streams.

Reviewer 2: Do we want to allow per stream resumption instead? Maybe that is part of the negotation? Rejecting the whole connection because a single stream is lost for an upstream that may have actually disappeared seems wasteful.  And counter to the overall direction of this change.

Author: I agree. Will be changing that part

1. Resumption is always initiated by the client and either allowed or denied by the server.
1. Resumption makes no assumptions of application state for delivered frames with respect to atomicity, transactionality, etc. See above.

### Resume Agreement

> If communication with resumption support has been successfully established, the decision on whether a particular REQUEST should be resumed is made for every stream individually. To make resumption enabled for a REQUEST, the Responder MUST explicitly set the (R)esume flag in the first response FRAME to the Requester. Once, the Requester received the first FRAME from the Responder and that frame has (R)esume flag set, then the current stream is assumed to be resumable. Otherwise, if the first Responder FRAME does not have (R)esume flag set, the stream is MUST be considered as not resumable. If a Requester has sent a REQUEST frame and then the connection was lost leaving the resumption for that stream in the unknown state, such a stream should wait until the connection is reestablished, and the RESUME | RESUME_OK frame is received. If RESUME | RESUME_OK includes the mentioned stream in the list of resumable streams, then the resumption is assumed to be enabled for that stream. Otherwise, the stream may be terminated with the __REJECTED__ or retransmit frame again.

Reviewer 3: Could we please improve the wording of the last sentence?

> Otherwise, the stream may be terminated with the __REJECTED__ or retransmit frame again.

What frame is retransmitted?

Author: Non, it should be terminated locally since the remote party decided to discontinue that stream. I will improve wording, had the same that feeling of absence "locally only" words but did not how to keep it short

Client side resumption operation starts when the client desires to try to resume and starts a new transport connection. The operation then proceeds as the following:

* Client sends RESUME frame.  The client MUST NOT send any other frame types until resumption succeeds.  The RESUME Identification Token MUST be the token used in the original SETUP frame.  The RESUME Number of Entries indicates the number of resumable streams which the Client wants to resume.  Every entry in the RESUME frame has a corresponding Stream ID to which the entry belongs to and an implied Position which indicates the total number of frames received for this particular stream on the Client side.
* Client waits for either a RESUME_OK or ERROR[CONNECTION_ERROR|REJECTED_RESUME] frame from the server.
* On receiving an ERROR[REJECTED_RESUME] frame, the client MUST NOT attempt resumption again.
* On receiving a RESUME_OK, the client:

>     * MUST assume that the next REQUEST, CANCEL, ERROR, and PAYLOAD frames continuously increasing their corresponding Received Frame Count

Reviewer 3: Do RSocket fragments (frames with `fragmentFollows` flag) also increase the frame count? Imho we should explicitly write it here for additional clarification.

Author: fragments follow flag is a part of Payload frame so it implicitly means that it has to be counted since fragment is still a payload frame

Client side resumption operation starts when the client desires to try to resume and starts a new transport connection. The operation then proceeds as the following:

> * Client sends RESUME frame.  The client MUST NOT send any other frame types until resumption succeeds.  The RESUME Identification Token MUST be the token used in the original SETUP frame.  The RESUME Number of Entries indicates the number of resumable streams which Clinet wants to resume.  Every entry in RESUME frame has a corresponding Stream ID to which this entry belongs to and Implied Position which indicates the total number of frames received for this particular stream on the Client side.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Client sends RESUME frame.  The client MUST NOT send any other frame types until resumption succeeds.  The RESUME Identification Token MUST be the token used in the original SETUP frame.  The RESUME Number of Entries indicates the number of resumable streams which the Client wants to resume.  Every entry in the RESUME frame has a corresponding Stream ID to which the entry belongs to and an implied Position which indicates the total number of frames received for this particular stream on the Client side.
```

Client side resumption operation starts when the client desires to try to resume and starts a new transport connection. The operation then proceeds as the following:

> * Client sends RESUME frame.  The client MUST NOT send any other frame types until resumption succeeds.  The RESUME Identification Token MUST be the token used in the original SETUP frame.  The RESUME Total Number Of Skiped Frames field indicates the total number of frames that the Client skipped from the cache among all resumable streams during the whole session.  The RESUME Number of Entries indicates the number of active resumable streams.  Every entry in RESUME frame has a corresponding Stream ID to which this entry belongs to and Received Frame Count which indicates the total number of frames received for this particular stream on the Client side.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Client sends RESUME frame.  The client MUST NOT send any other frame types until resumption succeeds.  The RESUME Identification Token MUST be the token used in the original SETUP frame.  The RESUME Total Number Of Skipped Frames field indicates the total number of frames that the Client skipped from the cache among all resumable streams during the whole session.  The RESUME Number of Entries indicates the number of active resumable streams.  Every entry in RESUME frame has a corresponding Stream ID to which this entry belongs to and Received Frame Count which indicates the total number of frames received for this particular stream on the Client side.
```

* Client waits for either a RESUME_OK or ERROR[CONNECTION_ERROR|REJECTED_RESUME] frame from the server.
* On receiving an ERROR[REJECTED_RESUME] frame, the client MUST NOT attempt resumption again.
* On receiving a RESUME_OK, the client:

>     * MUST assume that the next REQUEST, CANCEL, ERROR, and PAYLOAD frames contuniously increasing their corresponding Received Frame Count 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * MUST assume that the next REQUEST, CANCEL, ERROR, and PAYLOAD frames continuously increasing their corresponding Received Frame Count 
```

    * if successfully identified, then the server MAY send an ERROR[REJECTED_RESUME] frame if the server can not resume operation given the set of RESUME Implied Positions if the position or positions are not one it deems valid to resume operation from or other extenuating circumstances.
    * if successfully identified, then the server MAY send an RESUME_OK frame even if the server can not resume some of streams given the set of RESUME Implied Positions. If that scenarion decided, server MUST not include Stream IDs which are not resumable. Up on sending RESUME_OK frame, the server MUST terminate to ensure no resources are associated with those streams on the server side.

A Server that receives a RESUME frame after a SETUP frame, SHOULD send an ERROR[CONNECTION_ERROR].

A Server that receives a RESUME frame after a previous RESUME frame, SHOULD send an ERROR[CONNECTION_ERROR].

Leasing semantics are NOT assumed to carry over from previous connections when resuming. LEASE semantics MUST be restarted upon a new connection by sending a LEASE frame from the server.

> for more details, please see a description of possible [rsumption scenarios](./ResumptionScenarios.md)

Reviewer 2: typo

    +-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
    |                       Implied Position                        |
    +-------------------------------+-------------------------------+
                                   ...                               
```

* __Frame Type__: (6 bits) 0x0E
* __Number of Entries__: (23 bits = max value 2,088,957) Unsigned 23-bit integer of the number of resumable streams being in progress.
* __Stream ID__: (31 bits = max value 2^31-1 = 2,147,483,647) Unsigned 31-bit integer representing the resumable stream Identifier.
* __Implied Position__: (32 bits = max value 2^32 = 4,294,967,296) Unsigned 32-bit integer of the individual Stream Resume Last Received Frame Position from the remote party. Value MUST be > 0.

#### Keepalive Position Field

Keepalive frames include the set of implied positions of the client (or server). When sent, they act as a means for the other end of the connection to know the set of positions of the other side.

This information MAY be used to update state for possible retransmission, such as trimming a retransmit buffer, or possible associations with individual stream status.

> Note, the positions of the stream which has not changed between Keepalives, must not be exchanged to keep Keepalive Frame size as small as possible.

Reviewer 2: Is there a possibility that these get out of alignment? We previously sent total state in each keep alive.  Not we send effectively a set of deltas.

If they are out of alignment we potentially hide this from clients causing stalled upstream connections in a proxy for example.  How we we self repair in this case?

Should there be some way to checksum to detect they are out of alignment? Or possibility to provide some additional streams to verify the streams are still live on both sides?

Author: I guess that can be detected at the reconnection phase. However, we can use the global state for a sanity check and transfer it in addition to the set of individual streams. Having both values, the total number of emitted frames + the total number of received frames, and then keep alive sending individual patches, we can do the math and see if there is any diff

Author: Fixed that, now we send implied positions as before, so this should go out of aligment anymore
